#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass extarticle
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{indentfirst}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman Wreathe
\font_sans Linux Biolinum O
\font_typewriter Courier New
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts true
\font_sc false
\font_osf true
\font_sf_scale 85
\font_tt_scale 85
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 1
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 17
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 1in
\topmargin 1in
\rightmargin 1in
\bottommargin 1in
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title

\emph on
Ember
\emph default
, Chapter 2.1: Redesign (based on version 1.0.52)
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
The text here is outdated; this document is for discussing document design
 rather than the document text.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Redesigned by Elliot Chandler (Wallace)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
2017 Feb.
 16
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Introduction: Ethics and Ember
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the emerging hacker culture of the early 1960s, Ted Nelson, a graduate
 student at Harvard, began work on a computerized information management
 system that would later become known as “Project Xanadu”.
 The project promised amazing abilities.
 It was designed to provide definitive copies of documents that would be
 preserved in perpetuity, which could be referenced in other documents by
 quotations or references, so that the original source document of a passage
 could always easily be found.
 This aimed to provide an indefinitely scalable computerized collective
 memory for the preservation of humanity’s history and knowledge.
 This monumental project, despite significant corporate backing, was not
 a success.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Wolf, Gary.
 “The Curse of Xanadu”.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 I’d like to look at why it failed — but we’ll get back to that later.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are a large number of works of great cultural importance.
 They have touched on a number of meaningful subjects, but several subjects
 have stood out particularly for me: ethics, rights, prejudice and bigotry,
 and theology.
 These are elements of society that play important roles, influencing the
 ways people live and experience their daily lives.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When you look at life from a perspective of fundamentals, there are a few
 things that are necessary: food, water, and shelter.
 Without these basic elements, humans would not survive very long.
 If one is hard working and clever, one can provide these things for one’s
 self, by living off the land.
 When humans start to live together in communities, things become more complicat
ed; medical care and education become important.
 The goals of a community are to make life more secure and predictable for
 the community’s members, and to reduce the hardships associated with “primitive
” living (living without the support systems of a complex society).
 But with those goals comes a problem: how are those goals to be effectively
 implemented? Through the development of strategies such as specialization
 of individuals’ abilities and the creation of technological solutions,
 these challenges can be met.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As more people start living together, though, they will almost inevitably
 come into conflict.
 What can be done when the individual’s interests conflict with those of
 the society? What about conflicts between individuals? To deal with these
 issues, laws and a justice system can be put into place.
 An economy or labor-sharing strategy can aid in the exchange of services
 and goods, to avoid conflicts over these matters.
 A free market economy is helpful to a society, because it redirects the
 energies of greed and uses them as a force for technological development.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Philosophical discourse becomes important in many areas, such as the resolution
 of the conflicts and challenges of a complex society, and the research
 into understanding the world around us.
 This discourse leads to the development of more complex technology drawing
 on the ideas of the society, then leading to debates about ethics, to scientifi
c investigation about the nature of our world, and to the development of
 ways to understand and accept who we are, such as religion and science.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ideas, knowledge, and art become economically motivated, and so copyright
 and patent laws are established to encourage and protect innovation in
 these areas.
 The wide availability of information becomes increasingly relevant, and
 information technology and distribution systems such as books and computers
 are developed.
 Support infrastructures are created and strengthened, to protect society
 against threats both external and internal, such as disease, crime, terrorism,
 civil unrest, and war.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I would like to attempt to improve on the existing systems that have developed
 for solving these problems.
 I would like to undertake this project in an incremental, scalable manner,
 rather than creating a complex system that would need to be implemented
 all at once to be effective.
 That way, small improvements could be made without attempting to undertake
 the insurmountable task of improving larger components of society at once.
 This incremental development would allow for the strengths of the existing
 systems to persist, as well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The many texts I have studied have helped me understand better how I could
 go about achieving these goals, and have provided interesting and valuable
 insights about what I believe.
 In many cases, it is difficult or impossible to prove to the satisfaction
 of a large number of people what the ideal systems are for society; in
 such cases I can only at once stand by my own beliefs and also accept that
 other valid solutions and reasonings can exist as well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The most important thing I think I will achieve, which has both shaped and
 been shaped by my experience of study, is the incremental development of
 improved and redeveloped societal structure and infrastructure.
 To this end, I have gathered a number of disparate elements of the project
 under the name of “Ember”, for ease of reference; these diverse objectives
 I believe have the potential to improve the general standard of living.
 At the same time, it is important to ensure that the Ember project does
 not fall into the same pitfalls that befell Project Xanadu, despite their
 many parallels and similarities.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Project Xanadu and Ember are both projects with lofty goals, born out of
 a Nietzscheian rage at the status quo, aiming to radically transform and
 reshape various aspects of society for the better.
 They are both ambitious, and championed by someone without a thorough understan
ding of the technological and economic realities and limitations of the
 world around them.
 They both are driven by grand ideas, with little thought given to short
 term practical implementation and utility of those ideas.
 They both have the potential to absorb vast amounts of investment without
 return.
 My hope is that by assessing and strategizing around these similar aspects,
 and understanding the ways in which they relate to Project Xanadu’s failure
 to produce, such a catastrophe can be avoided by Ember.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ember is a multifaceted project to develop a scalable environment for building
 an effective society.
 The goal of the project is to create a system to enable efficacy, efficiency,
 and justice within society, by creating a social structure that would work
 to create an efficient opt-in society within the framework of the diverse
 and valuable existing societies.
 The plan for the project is to pursue these goals by developing individual
 components that each provide an integral part of the whole societal system.
 My current proposal is comprised of several components, including a coordinatio
n organization, a philosophy of ethics, a nonprofit standards-driven services
 collective, a computing environment, a reference collection of the most
 important knowledge, a library of great cultural works, a spiritual framework,
 and a multimedia artwork.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The four subjects that will prove integral in the effective development
 of the Ember project that I would principally like to discuss in this paper
 and which have been of most import to my journey of learning are ethics,
 rights, prejudice and bigotry, and theology.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ethics are one of the central aspects of a complex society, with an understandin
g of what is “justice” being necessary for the establishment of effective
 justice systems, and an understanding of what is ethically acceptable scientifi
c research and technological development being necessary for a society to
 respect the dignity of the world.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the Zimbardo prison experiment, we saw an influential and famous experiment
 that was ethically very dubious, and likely had lasting effects on the
 research participants.
 Is such research justified? This is a hard case to make, as the benefits
 derived from the Zimbardo experiment have been doubtful at best due to
 the poorly undertaken nature of the research.
 However, could such research that damages the participants be considered
 ethical in any scenario? Could it, perhaps, but only with the full understandin
g and consent of the participants? It seems likely that the nature of such
 an experiment is fundamentally harmful in such a way that it would be best
 to attempt to gain the knowledge through other, more ethical research methods
 if at all possible before trying such research techniques.
 By no means should such research practices as those seen in Zimbardo be
 standard or generally accepted within the scientific community.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Some scientific research is seen as harming the public interest for other
 reasons, such as Galileo Galilei’s assertions of a heliocentric planetary
 model, which were regarded as heresy by the Catholic church, which was
 the dominant social force in determining matters of ethics and morality
 in Europe at that time.
 This is a matter of ethics, as opposed to a matter purely of science, as
 the scientific results were considered to be evil.
 However, it seems that Galileo’s research has done no lasting harm, considering
 that it has become widely accepted and is no longer a matter of significant
 contention.
 Perhaps this acceptance is because the issue with Galileo’s research is
 the results he found, while with Zimbardo’s it is the ethics of the manner
 in which the research was undertaken.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Rights are an important social issue.
 In 
\emph on
Mrs.
 Dalloway
\emph default
, by Virginia Woolf, we encountered the debate about what rights should
 be protected in the thorny instance of an individual with mental challenges.
 One can consider whether Septimus Warren Smith had the right to not be
 controlled by Holmes and Bradshaw.
 Referring to Septimus, Woolf writes: “Lately he had become excited suddenly
 for no reason (and both Dr.
 Holmes and Sir William Bradshaw said excitement was the worst thing for
 him)”
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Woolf, Virginia.
 
\emph on
Mrs.
 Dalloway
\emph default
.
 p.
 140.
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 Does not Septimus have the right to exist without being bothered, regardless
 of whether it is considered the best thing for him? He does no one else
 any harm by being as he is, and is not disrupting society in any way, except
 inasmuch as it may perhaps reduce his ability to contribute to it.
 And even that seems that it may be excusable in light of the value of one’s
 right to liberty, much as one could make such an argument for the legitimizatio
n of a right to suicide.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Likewise, is involuntary confinement of someone who is not a threat to society
 moral or ethical? Does it violate the tradition of 
\emph on
habeas corpus
\emph default
? “Worshipping proportion, Sir William not only prospered himself but made
 England prosper, secluded her lunatics, forbade childbirth, penalised despair,
 made it impossible for the unfit to propagate their views until they, too,
 shared his sense of proportion”
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\emph on
Ibid
\emph default
.
 p.
 99
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 Does Bradshaw have any right whatsoever to impose such restraints, to place
 such barriers upon freedom of expression and action? Perhaps one could
 argue that the mentally incompetent are incapable by nature of exercising
 these rights appropriately and effectively, and thus should not be afforded
 them.
 Nevertheless, even such disabled and tragically affected individuals still
 likely have the right to have their desires and conscience and feelings
 paid respect and honored by the society around them.
 They are, presumably, individuals with their own emotions, realities, and
 conceptions of the world, thus deserving the same respect afforded to the
 healthy in any just and non-oppressive society.
 These are important social issues to consider and address in the development
 of an evolving societal system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Bigotry, hatred, racism, prejudice, and oppression are critical issues to
 address in the modern society, with tragedies such as slavery, genocide,
 and wartime racism persisting strongly into the present.
 An understanding needs to be built and lessons learned from history about
 how these elements can be addressed effectively and thoroughly, protecting
 the rights of all.
 In 
\emph on
The Souls of Black Folk
\emph default
, by prominent author W.
 E.
 B.
 Du Bois, racism is a prominent theme that is discussed.
 It is written that “the South believed an educated Negro to be a dangerous
 Negro”
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Du Bois, W.
 E.
 B.
 
\emph on
The Souls of Black Folk
\emph default
.
 p.
 24
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 Du Bois considered this assessment by the South to have some validity,
 because of the role of education in bringing forth “dissatisfaction and
 discontent”
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\size normal
\emph on
Ibid.
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 The recent development of feminist philosophies such as those seen in Virginia
 Woolf’s and Adrienne Rich’s work is clearly a step in the right direction,
 helping to sway the pendulum away from injustice, continuing along the
 path boldly set by the civil rights movement in the 1960s.
 However, racism and racial violence still persist, as evidenced and highlighted
 by the recent racial tension surrounding police brutality.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Theology plays an important role in society, providing a way for individuals
 to understand their role in that society and in the world.
 Occam’s Razor is a famous statement to the effect that “No more things
 should be presumed to exist…”
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Haddon, Mark.
 
\emph on
The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time
\emph default
.
 p.
 90.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 than are needed to explain the observations about which a collective truth
 has been established through consensus.
 Despite the seeming rationality of that statement, I nevertheless often
 choose to believe things on faith, despite being unable to prove them through
 scientific observation and logic.
 I come to these conclusions frequently as ways to best explain the parts
 of the world around me that I do not understand scientifically, but nevertheles
s seem to observe on a daily basis and believe to be real: life, emotions,
 and other similarly difficult-to-quantify elements of the world around
 us.
 By considering the world and drawing my own conclusions, I can create my
 own worldview, as real to me as the perceptions that are established through
 consensus and scientific reasoning.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\emph on
The Music of Life
\emph default
 presents a model of life that can be mistakenly argued to be unscientific,
 because it does not explain many of the vagaries of the way life and the
 way one’s personality and other traits that make one an individual come
 about.
 This model indicates that these traits are not coded in one’s genes, but
 originate otherwise.
 This model is scientifically reasonable, though, since the systems by which
 these traits develop and function are not fully or thoroughly understood,
 and are likely not completely determined quanta that can be effectively
 evaluated by measuring systems.
 Perhaps it is not possible to understand these traits at all.
 Perhaps one wishes genes might provide the definitive coding for an organism,
 providing a thorough way to comprehend the way that organism evolves and
 develops.
 However, this is not the way genes work.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I believe that God has created a sort of fettered omniscience for Himself,
 and has taken away His direct influence over the world and given living
 things the capacity for moral self-direction.
 This aspect of the world’s traits has been implemented in what has been
 recognized as the theory of the uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics,
 according to which nothing can be predicted with absolute certainty.
 Traditional thinking would seem to hold that through a comprehensive understand
ing of all the positions and vectors in a closed system, all of the states
 of that situation — past, present, and future — can be known simultaneously.
 Yet the observer effect leads to the situation that the most basic particles
 of matter are unable to be observed or predicted, because any observation
 will inevitably change their state, thus contributing to the chaos inherent
 in the uncertainty principle.
 In a lecture on quantum mechanics, the speaker discussed the idea of determinis
m: I believe that these maxims of unpredictability lead to the effective
 disintegration of multi-scale determinism, while it does seem to remain
 effective and in effect in the world on our scale.
 This unpredictability enables the world to exist as it does with true moral
 sovereignty, without the consequential ethical nihilism of the philosophies
 of fate or predestination.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Gnosticism is a group of belief systems sharing certain core tenets, particularl
y the focus on the development of 
\emph on
sophia
\emph default
 (wisdom) to attain 
\emph on
gnosis
\emph default
 (knowledge) and on the rejection of some elements of the physical world
 in the endeavor to attain ascendance into the spiritual.
 It shares common themes and elements with many Christian and other belief
 systems.
 In the Gnostic Gospel according to Mary Magdalene, it is written “There
 is no sin, but it is you who make sin when you do the things that are like
 the nature of adultery, which is called sin.”
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Gospel according to Mary Magdalene.
 Chapter 4, verse 26.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 This sentence emphasizes the Gnostic nature of the text, in its equating
 of sin with adultery providing a connection to the traditional Gnostic
 focus on the rejection of elements of the physical in the interest of the
 finding of knowledge through wisdom.
 While it would be hard to prove concretely that things like adultery are
 bad, that badness can nevertheless be understood: it is a truth that can
 be taken on faith, it can be understood through the collective wisdom of
 society, or it can be felt in one’s heart.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Present in my mind is the world presented by Francis Bacon in 
\emph on
The New Atlantis
\emph default
.
 While it isn’t presented as a dystopia in his novel, and seems that Bacon
 considers such an environment to be ideal, in light of the experiences
 of society nowadays approaching its traits in some ways, it raises frightening
 questions.
 For instance, what should the role be of surveillance in a society? In
 Bensalem, the society presented in the book, surveillance is present.
 And yet, surveillance today can seem frightening, considering the potential
 for its abuse.
 How should safeguards be put in place to simultaneously enable effective
 surveillance, while curtailing its abuse?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Considering these elements in the process of creating a system for alternative
 society development is clearly a vital part of the process.
 Failure to do so can produce a system which is unjust, incompetent, and
 inefficient.
 By avoiding this failure, the system developed can embody its principle
 objectives of creating an efficient, effective, and just society.
 The concepts that in the many great texts of civilizations provide invaluable
 insights for the development of the Ember project.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Redesign commentary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The document I have chosen to redesign is a chapter from an unfinished book
 that I was working on, advocating my project to develop resources to serve
 as models and infrastructure for innovative communities.
 While the document has become outdated and does not accurately represent
 the project in its present form, it does serve its purpose here as a document
 to be redesigned.
 Its purpose was to explain why my project is important, and to describe
 and promote interest in it.
 Its intended audience was individuals who would potentially be interested
 in collaborating with me on the project.
 The most significant readers' need served by the document is gaining an
 understanding of my project and responding to curiosity regarding it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The previous version of this text was 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

typeset
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 only in the very loosest sense of the term, simply by dumping it into a
 word processing app, and justifying it.
 Because word processing apps need to render text quickly for interactive
 editing, the results are suboptimal: justifying text nicely is a hard problem,
 and requires more complex algorithms than can be practically implemented
 for interactive editing.
 For instance, spacing between words in carelessly typeset text is frequently
 excessive, and there are often rivers (groups of spaces in consecutive
 lines nearby each other) that make the page inelegant.
 For this redesign, I have typeset the document using LyX/LaTeX, a computerized
 typesetting and layout program with significantly better algorithms than
 word processors usually have.
 It is able to provide a superior layout because it does not attempt to
 provide an accurate preview interactively when editing, and instead taking
 the time needed to carefully typeset the document in a separate step from
 document authoring.
 Thus, the first change I made to the document was to use a real typesetting
 system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The second change I made was to the typeface.
 The previous version was set using Times New Roman, which is a serviceable,
 classic, widely beloved typeface.
 However, I personally find faces based on the work of Renaissance typographer
 Nicholas Jenson to be more elegant and at least equally readable, and so
 I used one for this document.
 (There is a bit of an issue with this version of the italic face, as the
 baseline doesn't match that of the Roman face; I haven't gotten around
 to fixing that yet, making things look a bit 
\emph on
jarring
\emph default
 when set in italics.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
I don't understand yet how the baseline works in FontForge (my typeface
 authoring app of choice), so my need to research and learn about that is
 currently preventing fixing this issue.
\end_layout

\end_inset

)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Third, I moved the citations from parentheticals into footnotes.
 I don't think what I had (the entire citation embedded right in the text)
 was based on any style guide
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
and even if it were I wouldn't approve of it
\end_layout

\end_inset

, and it didn't look very good.
 I'd generally prefer Chicago-style endnotes with in-text author-date parentheti
cals, but simple footnotes are also perfectly acceptible and the difference
 is simply a matter of personal preference; since they were quicker to implement
 in this case (embarrassingly, it's been long enough that I have forgotten
 how to use LyX's automatic bibliographies), I used them instead.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
This would not be a problem if I had, ahem, not procrastinated, ahem, ahem.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
